---
title: Users and Groups
description: Linux is based on a system of users and groups that are useful for the people who use it, as well as for the system itself.
---

::tip
Users and groups allow structuring and securing system access, whether for people or system processes.
::

## User: definition

A user under Linux is an entity that can connect to the system and execute commands. Each user has a unique identifier called UID (User ID). System users, on the other hand, do not connect directly and generally have a UID below 1000, although this may vary depending on distributions (for example, on some distributions, human users start from 500).

::callout
There are different types of users:
- **root**: administrator user with all privileges. We speak of superuser.
- **System users**: created to run services (ex: `www-data`, `nobody`).
- **Human users**: created for people interacting directly with the system.
::

## Group: definition

A group is a set of users who share permissions. Groups simplify access management to certain files or directories.

For example, a `developers` group to which several users belong can be used to give access to a shared directory containing source code.

---

## Creating users and groups

### Key commands

::warning
These commands are those used on the **Alpine Linux** distribution (of which we use an [emulator](https://bellard.org/jslinux/vm.html?url=alpine-x86.cfg&mem=192) in class).
They are not always available, and it will be appropriate to search, depending on the distribution used, for the appropriate commands.
::

- `adduser`: creates a user ([man](https://fr.manpages.org/adduser/8)).
- `deluser`: deletes a user ([man](https://fr.manpages.org/deluser/8)).
- `addgroup`: creates a group ([man](https://fr.manpages.org/addgroup/8)).
- `delgroup`: deletes a group ([man](https://fr.manpages.org/delgroup/8)).
- `groups [user]`: displays groups associated with the user (replace `[user]` with a username)

### Example scenario
Imagine we want to create accounts for four users, then add them to the `nsi` group.

::card-group
```bash
This will create the following directories:
/home
├── nono
├── toto
├── nana
└── didi
```

```bash
# addgroup nsi
# adduser nono
# adduser toto
# adduser nana
# adduser didi
# adduser nono nsi
# adduser toto nsi
# adduser nana nsi
# adduser didi nsi
```
::