---
title: Best Practices
---

::card
---
title: Objectives
icon: i-heroicons-light-bulb
---

In Python as in programming in general, it is important to **understand** and **respect** syntactic conventions, at the risk of getting errors or unexpected behavior from the program. In this page, you will find all the best practices to implement as early as possible when writing Python programs.
::

## Indentation
In Python, indentation is crucial. Each code block that follows an `if`, `elif`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `def`, must be indented consistently.

Indeed, it is **indentation** that determines whether an instruction belongs to the current block or not. You can create indentation using the `Tab` key.

- **Example 1**: correct indentation in an `if` block

```py
x = 10

# Correct indentation
if x > 5:
    print("x is greater than 5")
    print("This message is part of the 'if' block")
print("This message is outside the 'if' block")
```

**Explanation**

The first two `print` instructions are indented, so they are part of the `if` block.
The last print instruction is not indented, it executes independently of the `if`.

- **Example 2**: incorrect indentation in an `if` block

```py
x = 10

# Incorrect indentation
if x > 5:
    print("x is greater than 5")
print("This message is part of the 'if' block")  # Bad indentation
```

**Explanation**

The second `print` instruction is not indented, so it is not part of the `if` block. It will therefore be executed, regardless of the value of `x > 5`

- **Example 3**: indentation error in nesting

```py
x = 10
y = 5

if x > 5:
    print("x is greater than 5")
if y > 3:
print("y is greater than 3")  # Bad indentation
```

**Explanations**

The second `print` instruction is not indented, so it is not part of the `if y > 3` block.
Python will return an error, because at least one indented instruction is required after `if`, `elif`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `def` instructions.