---
title: Introduction
description: Digital photography is now obvious to us. But it has only existed for a few decades, and its ancestors were just as fascinating. Let's dive into history!
---

You can consult the article on [:icon{name="mdi:wikipedia"} the history of photography](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histoire_de_la_photographie).

## Film Photography

1. **Principle of film photography:** Film photography is based on the use of photosensitive films to capture images.

2. **Year of invention:** It was invented in 1839 by Louis Daguerre and Henry Fox Talbot.

3. **"Developing a film photograph" operation:** Developing a film photograph consists of chemically treating the film exposed to light to reveal the latent image.

---

## Digital Photography

4. **Element enabling the emergence of digital photography:** The digital sensor is the key element enabling the capture and conversion of images into digital data.

5. **Year of invention:**

- The first digitization of a photograph, using a scanner, was performed in 1957 by Russell Kirsch.
- In 1975, Steve Sasson, an engineer at KODAK, made the first digital shot.

6. **Simplification of digital photography:** Digital photography has simplified the process by allowing instant viewing of images, deletion of failed shots, and the ability to store a large number of photos.

7. **Most used device:** Smartphones are now the most commonly used devices for taking photographs.

---

## Digital Images

8. **Image definitions:** These numbers represent image resolutions, expressed in number of pixels, which determine the quality and sharpness of the image. For example, 1920x1080 means 1920 pixels wide by 1080 pixels high.

9. **Number of pixels in a 720x480 image:** In a 720x480 image, we find 720 pixels wide multiplied by 480 pixels high, for a total of 345,600 pixels.

10. **RGB mode:** RGB mode is a color coding system based on the combination of three primary colors: Red, Green, and Blue. Each pixel is represented by a mixture of these three colors at different intensities, allowing the creation of a vast range of hues. For example, by combining 100% red, 100% green, and 100% blue, we get white. By combining 0% of all three, we get black.
